======================
Continuous Integration
======================

.. default-role:: code
.. include:: rstcommon.rst

.. contents::

This document aims to be a comprehensive guide to using and developing the
Continuation Integration (CI) system employed by |NimSkull|.

Troubleshooting failures
========================

Failing tests
-------------

While "Run tester" log will give you the full detail on the test run, it can be
very hard to find the failing test in the jungle of passing tests, so there are
several integrations built into CI to make this easier:

* Github Annotations are generated for test failures:
  * If you are adding new tests in your PR, failure in any of them will be
    annotated and you can find them directly in the "Files changed" view of the
    PR

* All test failures are isolated and printed in "Print all test errors" step.
  By default Github Actions collapse this step so you'll have to expand it.

"There are differences when building from source archive compared to building from git"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are several reasons for why this happens:

* The compiler is using information only available when building directly from
  git, and the source archive generation routine is not updated to include this
  information in the archive and/or the compiler build is not coded to use the
  stored information.

* A cosmic ray hit the CI test system and made it generate a slightly different
  binary from the same source code. A re-run should clear the error in this case.

To get more details about the error, open the failing workflow run and go to
"Summary". Scroll down to the "Artifacts" section and look for one named
"differences between binary from source archive and git". This contains an HTML
report generated by ``diffoscope`` about the differences.

If you need more information, the binaries that were compared can be found in
the following artifacts:

* "binaries from source archive"

* "release binaries"

Reproducibility test failures
-----------------------------

PRs to be merged are tested to make sure that the compiler build remains
deterministic with regards to the environment. To learn more about why
reproducible builds matter and the concepts, see the `Reproducible builds
project <https://reproducible-builds.org/>`_.

When tests of this category fail, the culprit usually are:

* Your changes introduces nondeterministic variables like the current
  date/current time.

* If you are writing packaging code, it should be aware that file system
  ordering is nondeterministic and files must be ordered in memory before they
  are added to archives.

Text diffs are generated, but there is no highlighting and they can be hard
to read when the differences are large. To help with this, companion HTML
reports are also generated and can be downloaded from Github Artifacts.

To access the HTML report, open the failing test run and go to "Summary".
The reports are saved in artifacts with suffix "reproducibility test diffoscope
output".

Lifecycle of an approved PR
===========================

The only way to get code into |NimSkull|'s development branch is via PRs, and CI
was developed to leverage this.

1. PR is staged for merging.

2. The PR enters the merge queue and is merged to a staging branch with
   ``gh-readonly-queue/`` prefix. Multiple PRs might be staged in this period
   to increase efficiency.

3. The testing pipelines test the code, generate binaries and render
   documentation.

4. Assuming that the staging branch passes all tests, ``devel`` is
   fast-forwarded to the staging branch head commit.

5. The "Publish" pipeline deploys the rendered documentation and binaries
   generated by the testing pipeline earlier in the staging branch.

Assumptions in CI design
------------------------

This lifecycle has a number of useful properties which we use in our approach to CI as follows:

* Code entering ``devel`` must have passed through the staging branch, and that
  ``devel`` will be fast-forwarded to this branch:

  * This allows us to run crucial evaluation tasks on the staging branch only,
    and when that passes and ``devel`` is fast-forwarded, we can access prior
    runs and obtain build results.

* Only "light" tests have to be run on PRs to help developers debug their code
  before it is reviewed by a human. More time-consuming tests that are not
  likely to fail can be run later when the PR enters the merge queue.

Pipelines
=========

This section describes the design of each pipeline and the
dependencies between them.

"Build and test"
----------------

Goals
.....

* Verify that the compiler, tools, and standard library test suites pass

* Verify that the compiler can be bootstrapped with ORC. Whether this compiler
  is fully functional is not tested at the moment.

* Verify that a source archive can be built.

  * Compiler and tools built from the source archive work.

  * Building from source archive is identical to
    building from a git clone.

* Render HTML documentation for upload to Github Pages.

* Build release binaries.

API
...

This pipeline handles all the building work, but it does not handle the task
of publishing it's generated data. That part is handled by the "Publish"
pipeline.

To support publishing, this pipeline exports the build result as Github Artifacts,
which are used by other pipelines, these artifacts are:

* "release manifest tool": contains a built copy of
  ``tools/release_manifest.nim`` for Linux.

* "release binaries": built via ``koch unixrelease`` and also contains related
  JSON metadata. These binaries are built straight from the git clone.

* "source archive": generated from the git clone.

* "Generated docs": HTML documentation generated from source. This is the
  ``doc/html`` folder after a ``koch docs`` run.

Changes to how these artifacts are packaged must be reviewed carefully to
ensure that dependent pipelines will still function.

This pipeline also makes use of multiple jobs, which can make tracking its
success status hard. To that end, an "All check passed" check is provided
that will reflect the final status of the pipeline. Currently this is used
for integration with other tools that rely on Github Checks status.

Job dependency graph and internal API
.....................................

In order to maximize throughput, steps are split into multiple dependent
jobs. This allows for:

* Unrelated steps to execute in parallel on multiple VMs.

* Quick turn-around time for test runs without waiting for packaging to finish.

Github Actions UI provides an overall look into the dependency graph which can
be seen from "Summary" page of any "Build and test" `workflow run
<https://github.com/nim-works/nimskull/actions/workflows/ci.yml>`_.

In addition to the public API, there are several internal APIs used for sharing
data between jobs in this pipeline:

* "Download compiler" and "Upload compiler" actions: These can be found in
  ``.github/actions/download-compiler`` and ``.github/actions/upload-compiler``
  respectively. These actions allow a job to upload its workspace, all files
  changed/generated compared to the git source code, and allow that to be
  downloaded by dependent jobs.

  This is used to replicate the "workspace with binaries" across parallel jobs
  so they can run independently.

* "binaries from source archive": Contains binaries built from the source
  archive generated from the git clone. This is generated by
  ``source_binaries`` job and will be compared to a similar artifact generated
  by the ``package`` job.

  For the comparison to succeed, it's crucial that the packaging code is
  the same between ``source_binaries`` and ``package``.

* ``pre_run`` outputs: The ``pre_run`` job provides data that dictates how CI
  will be run:

  * ``skipped``: Whether a run should be skipped.

  * ``matrix``: The target matrix shared between jobs.

"Test compiler build reproducibility"
-------------------------------------

This pipeline verifies that the compiler can be deterministically built. See
the `Reproducible builds project <https://reproducible-builds.org/>`_ for more
information on the testing criteria.

This pipeline has a rather long runtime, and rarely fails, so it is only run
once a PR enters the merge queue.

As a workaround for GitHub's lack of support for different criteria for merge
versus entering the queue, this pipeline will be skipped and always report
success for PRs.

This pipeline is developed with a rather standard matrix and does not perform
any data sharing. Working with this pipeline only requires understanding on
the `reprotest <https://pypi.org/project/reprotest/>`_ tool.

"Publish"
---------

Publishes build results from prior run of the "Build and test" pipeline on
the staging branch. Changes to the public API of "Build and test" must be
tested against "Publish".

This pipeline will perform pushes to the repository, so a lot of care must be
put into any changes to it.

Only one instance of this pipeline might be run at any given time, due to its
mutating nature. Currently Github Action's ``concurrency`` feature is used to
block multiple runs.

Development guidelines
======================

General
-------

* Each CI VM is weak, so prioritize parallelization by dividing the work into
  multiple independent jobs that can be executed by multiple VMs.

* Avoid repeated runs by extracting as many build results from other
  pipelines/jobs as possible: CI concurrency is limited, so running less is
  preferable.

* Steps and errors should be as descriptive as possible: Developers must
  understand how testing is done in order to debug their code.

* Make jobs that provide highly relevant statuses run as early as possible, for
  example, tests should be run as soon as it can be done. If tests don't pass
  reproducibility is a moot point.

* Pipelines that generate release artifacts should use pinned dependencies and
  OS. This avoid breakage due to random differences in software version.

Github Actions
--------------

* Prefer using a version tag. This makes sure that errorneous updates
  to an action will not cause our CI to fail.

Tools
=====

This section documents some of the tools created for use by CI.

Github Actions Problem Matcher
------------------------------

A `problem matcher
<https://github.com/actions/toolkit/blob/main/docs/problem-matchers.md>`_ for
|NimSkull| code is provided at ``.github/nim-problem-matcher.json``.

This can be loaded into a job with

.. code-block::
   echo "::add-matcher::.github/nim-problem-matcher.json"

and will convert all messages generated by the |Nimskull| compiler into annotations.

Print all failed testament results
----------------------------------

``tools/ci_testresults.nim`` can be used to print only test failures from a
testament run.

Use this after a failed testament run to provide developers with a dedicated
view of all test failures.

It is also integrated with Github Actions to generate file annotations for
failed tests.

Release manifest tool
---------------------

Located at ``tools/release_manifest.nim``, this tool can be used to compose a
release manifest or to query it. This tool can be run on developer machine and
has rather comprehensive built-in documentation, please refer to that for
more details.
